I'm thrilled to be back.
Thank you for joining live, online.
Thank you for joining virtually
later through recordings.
It's fantastic to have you here.
Thank you to the Frontend Masters' staff
who I quite literally owe my career to
because I got my start teaching
because Mark called me up one day and
he was like, come up here and teach.
And it took me a few weeks to convince
myself I'd come up to cold Minnesota in
November, December.
But I came up here and
my whole career blossomed from doing that.
So, I thank Mark and his staff for
all the fantastic stuff that they've done.
They're the best in the business.
I teach exclusively at Frontend Masters.
I don't record anywhere else
because they're the best.
So, there's lots of my courses
on here that you can find and
some really fantastic other
courses on Frontend Masters.
I watched some of the algorithms
courses that other teachers have done,
just to get a sense of what's being
presented, making sure that I'm
presenting things both consistently but
also in my own voice.
So there's some really fantastic ones.
I think one actually
just came out recently,
ThePrimeagen how to algorithms course,
it was really fantastic.
So, check out all of those great
resources on here as well.
All right, so
just as some recommended reading,
depends on kind of your
background with computer science.
I feel like a lot of times people
get upset with this general topic,
because the first Google that you do and
you land on a Wikipedia page, and they
start throwing a bunch of mathematical
symbols or complex terminology.
And it might feel like this
general idea of algorithms and
data structures is hard unless you
have some sort of formal background.
I do have a computer science background,
but it's 25 years old at this point.
So, I think at least half if not
the majority of my skills in this
area are the practical on the job
skills rather than all the theoretical
stuff you get taught in school.
And what I hope you take away from that is
that not that education isn't helpful, but
that it's not requisite.
It's not a requirement that
you've gone through some sort of
hardcore course to be
able to learn this stuff.
And I found these books
a couple of years ago.
I've started with the Computer Science
Distilled and then a couple years later,
the unleashed one came out.
I'm not even gonna try to pronounce
this guy's name because I'm sure I'll
butcher it.
But the books are fantastic,
especially the Computer Science Distilled,
it really is like, if you have
a computer science background then it's
a review of those things it
sort of hits the high topics.
And say, yeah I remember,
red black tree or
I remember this kind of sword or whatever.
But it doesn't get too into the weeds,
it's an outline.
It's a roadmap of the things that you
might wanna go back and check on.
If you don't have a computer
science background,
it's actually a really fantastic outline
of things that you could go dig into to
learn computer science without having gone
through, say a four year college degree.
So, I really highly recommend that book.
And a lot of the things that I use in sort
of a practical sense are founded in things
that you might read in this book.
So, by the name, it's both theory and
practice and I think that's really
kind of the way to go with this stuff.
So, I recommend those books.
I don't have any affiliate links,
I'm not getting anything for it.
But I do think those are very
useful books to read.
A couple of disclaimers,
I kind of already have hinted at this.
But the other courses that Frontend
Masters has and other resources that you
find out there in the world,
tend to take a pretty straightforward,
what I would call almost
an academic lecture approach.
And I don't mean this in a disparaging
way, but there's kind of a standard set of
topics that you're supposed to go over
that map similar to what you learn in,
your first couple of semesters
of a computer science degree,
taking data structures courses.
And I want you to think of
this course as not that.
There are other great courses,
again, Theprimeagen and
others, other great
courses on those topics.
This I want you to think of
more like your lab course.
If you've taken a college course where
you had to do a lecture and a lab,
I want you to think of this
one more like the lab course.
Second disclaimer might
ruffle a bit of feathers.
But we're using JavaScript, but
I'm like, we have to use JavaScript.
I'm not like, I want to use JavaScript,
this is absolutely the right language for
this.
It's the most widespread language, and
I don't think anybody can deny that.
And I've built an entire career
being happy with JavaScript.
Personally, I kind of consider myself in
a transition point to post JavaScript.
But JavaScript is gonna be around, and
I'm gonna be writing JavaScript until
the end of my career, I'm quite certain.
So, we have to use JavaScript,
it's a great language.
There are pros and
cons to us taking on a topic like
this in a language like JavaScript.
One of the pros is its accessibility,
is how easy it is to get things done.
How much of the underlying mechanisms
you don't have to worry about because
JavaScript the language is taking
care of those things for you.
And that goes for garbage collection,
it goes for typing, it goes for
all kinds of things.
The downside to that is that most of
the theory behind data structures and
algorithms is based on you being able
to have control over those things.
So, it doesn't mean that none
of its applicable to JavaScript.
But for example, there are algorithms
that are written specifically because
they know that in a language where memory
is contiguously marked and you go from one
place to another in an array,
then those are contiguous memory segments.
And accessing the next element in
the array is basically a no-op,
it's just a single addition of a pointer.
They're based on that sort
of internal knowledge.
And we would apply the same
algorithm to JavaScript, and
while we might get great performance,
we're not gonna get the performance
that the algorithm designers intended.
Because we're not using at all
the same kind of mechanism,
we're several levels higher
in abstraction at that point.
So, do take with a bit of a grain of
salt when you get into those hardcore
algorithms.
I'm talking about things like
quicksort and stuff like that.
If you get into the deepness
of these algorithms,
you do have to take with a grain of
salt that what you are coding in
JavaScript may functionally work,
but may not have the same kind
of characteristics that
the original design intended.
Another example is, it may be easy for
you to code an algorithm where you create
an array and return it and then spread
that array into a bigger array.
And that's just sort of, it seems in
the JavaScript world as a free operation,
but you're creating a tremendous
amount of garbage collection pressure.
And that's something that the designers of
many of the classical algorithms never had
to worry about.
They did not worry that, right in
the middle of my really fast operation,
it's gonna throw up a garbage collector
that blocks the thread or something.
So, there are lots of balances that we
have to take, which is again why I treat
this more like a lab course than
a theory or academic course.
Lots of balances that we have to play
between the processing and the memory.
In fact, we'll get into some of that
kind of memory management stuff
in a garbage collected world.
Those are things that, the original
founders of, data structures science and
computer science, they wouldn't have
even needed to concern themselves
with because they used systems that
didn't have those same properties.
So, that's what I mean when I
sort of shrug and say, man,
we have to use JavaScript,
we're gonna use JavaScript.
I don't have anything, I don't hold
any grudges against JavaScript,
but in a perfect world, you'd probably be
tackling the learning of this through
one of those lower level languages.
But then again, 99% of us aren't
gonna go learn those languages.
So, we don't wanna be stuck and
gate kept out of the knowledge of this and
there's plenty to be gained from
applying proper thinking in
whatever layer of abstraction
you're working in, okay?
So just, so you're aware, keep those
caveats in mind as we go forward.